So we've come to Genesis chapter 43.
We'll cover the whole chapter, what a beautiful chapter it is for us.
Beloved, God loves you.
And woven into this passage is his tremendous love
that he'll never leave us nor forsake us, and we see it through the sons of Jacob known as Israel.
2,000 years later from the time of the cross still standing, 4,000 years from the time of this writing or reading that we have here in Genesis 43, God has been faithful to Israel for those thousands of years and a demonstration of His faithfulness to us.
So Genesis chapter 43, I know I could do more and talk about the life of Joseph.
And we will, 25% of this book of beginning is about him.
And I'd like to just get into what we're gonna see here in our passage as we look at these, here's my outline and we'll hit them as we go.
But Father, we pray again that we sang of your faithfulness, we sang of your goodness because you are a merciful and gracious God.
You love us.
And Father, I pray that even anything else in today's message, that the heart of God and your love for us reaches deep.
I pray for anyone where they're at in their place with you, their walk with you to know your love for them.
And you show it and you demonstrate it through this passage.
So let it come alive apart from man and his ways.
And just the heart of God in your name, amen.
So the first point that we see, and I just kind of group them because I like to do the big chunks as we flow through here, but we're going to see in verses one through seven that the brothers have to face their past.
and their past takes them back to Egypt.
Verse one and two says, now the famine was severe in the land and it came to pass when they had eaten up the grain, which they had brought from Egypt that their father said to them, go back, buy us a little food.
You know, we're reading in verse one and two, God's relentless love.
He will chase us.
He will follow us to the ends of the earth to bring us back.
Some of the greatest books you'll read, I encourage everyone.
We read them in our Bible college.
The Jesus style, the Father style, and the Spirit style.
Three books, I can't encourage you enough to read as he summarizes the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit and just, oh, the Jesus style, one of the greatest, you know, I'd have to put it in my top.
two or three of the greatest books I've ever read.
And I try to read it on a regular basis and where I go with that is.
He loves the call, Jesus, the hound dog from heaven.
He will chase us to the ends of the earth.
He'll never let us wander and just leave us to ourselves.
He's always
Following after us to bring us back and this is kind of what this whole chapter is about is this Relentless love that he has for these these boys and as we studied last week and we were looking at For whom the Lord loves he chastens and he says there that he chastens his sons and daughters that were not illegitimate were
We're his kids and he's going to do what every mother and father would do.
I'm going to go find you wherever you are.
I'm never going to let you go.
I'm going to the distance, whatever it takes.
And there's this place, as we read here in verse one and two, God will put us in a place that we have to face our past.
because really these boys are running from their past.
They know their guilt was what they did to Joseph.
We studied that last week.
They know this is, they have these guilty conscience and God's coming to give them this freedom of release that they're gonna have an opportunity to just be set free.
And so we develop again in our passage today as God's doing that, he's breaking that and the title of my message is The Forging of a Nation.
God's forging a nation here.
And as I opened, this nation is going to stand for 4,000 years and it will stand through the tribulation period.
It will stand and come out on the other end of a millennial kingdom.
And it was all a demonstration that we will always look and see that this is God and his hand that with who he is and what he says he will do, he will do.
And verse three through five says, but Judah spoke to him saying,
The man solemnly warned us saying, you shall not see my face unless your brother's brother is with you.
Speaking of Benjamin, if you send our brother with us, we will go down and buy you food.
But if you will not send him, we will not go down.
For the man said to us, you shall not see my face unless your brother is with you.
They're saying, hey dad, this guy's serious.
Dad, you gotta understand like,
I know Egypt's big, but don't think that we're going to slip into Egypt by food and get out.
This guy is there.
He's waiting for us.
He's going to find us.
And this guy is serious about if you don't bring your brother back and prove that you're not spies, then he's going to deal with us.
Simians in jail and the rest of us will end up in jail or worse, or as well, we're going to end up with no food.
He's not going to sell us food if we don't show up with Benjamin.
And what we see here, again, and maybe you feel this way, God puts them in an impossible situation.
Be thankful.
I mean it.
And I know it's hard.
when God puts you in an impossible situation.
There is no other solution to this problem.
There is no other grain anywhere in the land.
The famine is global.
Everybody's coming to Egypt.
No Egypt, no food, no food, death.
No Benjamin, no food, death.
The situation
is impossible to solve, except through one means, and it's to go back to Egypt.
And I am thankful when God puts me or you.
I'm with you, I have empathy for your situation, I have compassion for your situation, and I hope no one ever thinks that I'm being cold and lacking empathy or compassion.
I know your pain, I know your struggle, but I know
In the impossible situation, I feel the absolute freedom when I speak to you or I look in the mirror regarding my own personal situation or even within my family who my heart breaks.
Anything happens to them as you would as you do as well.
But I go, I'm free because this situation is so impossible.
Only you can solve this.
And therefore, the only place I need to come to
is through you.
I've thought of everything that I could possibly do, and none of those things have worked.
I know there's nothing else.
We'll work.
I just have to come and throw myself at the mercy of, for us, the cross that goes, I know the thoughts that I think towards you, says the Lord, thoughts of peace, not of evil, to give you a future and a whole.
I know all things work together for good for those who love God and called according to His purpose.
be thankful for the impossible situation.
You know what I noticed though, that they're not doing?
Because they got some work to do here.
God's got some work to do.
Boy, he's got his hands filled with this family of Jacob.
He's got his hands filled with every one of us in this room.
That's for sure.
There's no prayer meeting.
You notice this?
All that they're going through, we've never read
that the patriarch says, boys, let's pray.
Let's pray to the God that I watched the sin, I saw the ladder into heaven and angels ascending and descending, who spoke a promise that we will outnumber the grains of sand in the world and the stars in the sky, and that he's gonna make us a great nation and do something great with us.
No prayer, no prayer meeting,
You would think this would be the time, boys, let's gather, bring the kids, let's show them and demonstrate to them the power of prayer.
It's an impossible situation and the only hope that we have is that the Lord's going to show up.
Can't we be like that?
Oh man, we'll go to the bank, we'll go to the friend, we'll go to the internet, we'll go to
Lord, help us all, Facebook.
We'll go to all these places and the Lord's like, I'm here.
I mean, I'll speak to you.
And I just want to hedge that with, but don't think that it's going to be the moment.
A lot of these impossible situations, because he wants to speak a bunch of other things that need to be dealt with to bring a resolution to this one thing.
Rarely is the one thing, the only thing.
There's so many other things that God's like, I had to bring you to this impossible situation, because there's these other things I need to show you in your life.
And there's a power that God has given us on the offensive.
When you look at the armor of God, Ephesians 6, and take the helmet of salvation, the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God,
Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit.
Spiritual prayers.
Where we pray waiting for the Spirit of God to show up and you know what happens, you've been there, you know what I'm just reminding myself and you can listen in.
For me to enter into a time of spiritual prayer,
I have to break through a time of my flesh.
And a lot of times the time of my flesh is getting through all of this wandering thoughts.
Notice that Ephesians 6 goes on being watchful to this end with all perseverance and supplication for all the saints.
There's a watching that needs to be done, a being on guard because the flesh, the world and the devil wants to come and go.
The last thing I want for you is to be praying.
So I'm going to remind you about your car tires that need replaced.
and you'll go and you'll look on the internet and see who has a sale on car tires.
You'll check with your work calendar and see what's a good day to get your tires replaced, et cetera, et cetera.
Then the next thing you know, well, it's actually time to go to work.
And your whole prayer time was hijacked by the devil because he's so good at this.
And here we see no prayer meeting.
at all where they could have prayed one for another.
But God's working and verse six and Israel said, why did you deal so wrongly with me as to tell the man whether you had still another brother?
Back in 42, 36 last week,
when they're having this conversation, when they come back, and Jacob their father said to them, you have bereaved me, telling this man about Benjamin and said, you can't come back here if you don't bring Benjamin.
You bereaved me.
Joseph's no more.
Simea is no more.
He's in prison, and now you want to take Benjamin.
Jacob is pouring his heart out.
And there's something to be seen here is it doesn't move these boys yet.
They got a long way to go, but God's going to break them down because God wants them to face their past.
And here they are.
We can see they are not broken like, man, dad's heart's broken.
It's 20 years later, and he's grieving Joseph.
Now here it is, who knows how many weeks or months the grain lasted and he's like, I don't have Simeon now.
I don't know what's up with him.
Now you want to take Benjamin?
That was the last son of my wife Rachel.
This is heartbreaking what we have here.
And God's using this because it's 20 year lie, but they still haven't faced up.
God is forcing them back to the face their past.
putting them in an impossible situation so that God can deal with them because God is forging a nation.
And nations, even America, Israel is made up of individuals and it's the sum total of the cumulative individuals that make up a nation.
10 of these boys need to be broken and brought into a unity.
And we're going to see how God's doing that in our chapters to come.
Well, verse seven goes on to say, but they said the man, they keep calling him the man.
I love that because they don't know it's Joseph, but you know, we always go the man.
He's the man.
ask us pointedly about ourselves and our family saying, is your father still alive?
Have you another brother?
And we told him according to these words, could we possibly have known that he would say, bring your brother down in our version of the world?
It's, what do you think we're mind readers?
This is an amazing verse in that we see a rarity
of mind-reading expectation between men.
Usually the mind-reading expectation is between a husband and a wife.
Is it not?
Right?
Husband and wife, like...
How did you not know?
That's what I was thinking.
How would I know?
That's what you were thinking.
You didn't tell me.
And here we see this mind reading moment between men and not a husband and a wife.
And me and Renee have our moments of mind reading.
I'll go, I didn't know.
How didn't you know?
I didn't know because you didn't tell me.
And then we'll flip it the other way.
I'll like, what happened?
She's like, what do you mean?
I go, what happened?
I thought you would know.
She goes, how would I know if you didn't, you know, tell me.
And so here Jacob Israel saying to them, why did you say that?
And they're like,
Like we could read this guy's mind and then it's building on dad.
I'm telling you this guy He's a nut and I don't know what it is about us, but he is on to us for something and Here we go.
Well here.
We see an amazing thing of verse 8 through 10 is Judas change Remind you of this it was Judah who said let's sell him This is what started the whole thing.
It was Judah's idea of
to sell Joseph.
They're all we're going to kill him.
Then they said, let's sell him.
Why kill him when we can sell him?
So here we're going to see this change in Judah.
And he's going to put himself and say, let me be the surety for this matter, verse 8 through 10.
Then Judah said to Israel, his father, send the lad with me, and we will rise and go that we may live and not die.
Both we and you and also our little ones.
I myself will be assuredy, a down payment for him.
From my hand, you shall require him.
If I do not bring him back to you and set him before you, then let me bear the blame forever.
For if we had not lingered surely, by now we would have returned the second time."
I love this and that Judah is coming to the place, that he's being what appears the first one broken, like
It was all about me.
What's best for me?
Here comes a dreamer.
Let's kill him.
Now let's tell him, make a couple bucks.
And now he's come to this place of, you know what?
If this is what it takes to get the grain to the family, I'm willing to let it be my life that's laid down.
And we see this change in this place of Judah.
And it's just interesting parallel as we look at these things that
I think the devil will start to recognize.
He probably thought originally that the Messiah to redeem from Genesis chapter 3, the fall, that it would be Joseph who the Messiah would come through because of this great dream and everybody bowing down.
He wouldn't know, of course, that it would be Judah.
We have the advantage of the Scriptures that we know it's Judah that we see here.
And here we see it's just an interesting thing that Judah's ready to say, put the guilt upon me.
And it will be Jesus Christ, the greater than Judah, the lion of the tribe of Judah, who will come and be the one who say, put their guilt upon me so that they might be
Well, John 3, 16, for God so loved the world that he gave is only begotten Son, that whoever believes in him should not perish but have everlasting life.
John 1711, now I am no longer in the world, but these are in the world and I come to you, Holy Father, keep through your name those whom you have given me that they may be one as we are.
While I was with them in the world, I kept them in your name.
Those whom you gave me, I have kept and none of them is lost except the son of perdition that the scripture might be fulfilled.
Jesus came down payment, fulfilled it all, kept every last one of them and here,
we see of what the Lord's doing here.
He's going to keep everyone of them through this great trowel.
And again, as I said, the title, I called it, The Forging of a Nation.
A nation's made up of individuals.
God's breaking these men.
He's going to make them a nation because when they come in,
when we would study through to access, when they come in and go all the way through from Genesis through exit, 70 of them are coming in, and 400 years later, 2.5 million are going out.
A great and mighty nation, and this would be the fact if these 10 were not united as brothers, when they come into Egypt, they would have divided in Egypt.
They have to be broken
of their past, they have to be united as one, to stick together as one when they come in as foreigners among the land there in Egypt.
God's forging a nation that we're reading here, it's more than this story that we go, what's this story all about?
Well, here's what this story is about.
Did anybody, I joked about this a couple weeks ago,
Who knows the story of the speedwell?
Who knows the story of the Mayflower?
Anybody?
Mayflower, right?
1600s, forefathers, pilgrims, coming to America to establish this nation that here we are, coming up on that, our independence, 250 plus years of the greatest nation on the world.
Do you realize that?
I know I'm digressing.
We live in the greatest nation of the world.
Amazing.
To be birthed anywhere, we're birthed in this land.
And I digress, but I remember seeing the Charlie Kirk and the debate on one of the campuses, and it was just this student who hated America.
And he said, why do you hate America?
Give me one reason why you would hate America.
And the student went silent.
It was like a learned behavior, a conditioning that happened.
And Charlie Kirk was like, why does everybody in the world want to live in America?
Even the people who hate Americans say they want to leave, they don't.
They stay.
Why?
Would you hate America?
We have the greatest nation in the world.
I remember when I did my first mission trip to Russia, 1993.
I slept with my passport on my body because I said, no matter what happens, I get robbed.
You name it, fill in the blank.
I know I got it.
airplane waiting for me in Moscow's airport and I will get to that airport with that passport in my hand saying hold my seat I said because I am getting back to the greatest nation in the world and every time I leave I always go this is amazing I get to go back to America when I go to Nepal I will be there loving every moment investing every moment but in my heart always knowing I
get to go back to America.
This is amazing.
We live in the greatest nation.
Much is given, much is required, and I'm thankful for this nation.
And I just speak these things because I think whatever the generation, whatever's going on, there's this conditioning that we're an evil nation.
We are a great nation, and we need to be greater, and we can become greater when the great nation who makes God the Lord.
So the speed well
Mayflower, speed well, two boats, two ships, leaving England, Europe there, to come to America to establish the nation, to make a great nation.
Hey, by the way, the school books or the people want to teach that they were escaping religious persecution.
There was religious persecution there in Europe.
But the majority of the pilgrims came from left that religious persecution, moved to Holland.
They were in Holland and they were not under persecution.
They came back to get on these ships to establish a nation for the sake of the gospel.
You read the Christian writings to establish a nation for the sake of the gospel and that we might just be a people of a stepping stone.
to be used by God to do that.
And what our forefathers did, we reaped, and they established, and they endured, and they did this, and we get this beautiful blessing to live in the greatest nation in the world.
Mayflower speedwell, both of them left.
It was two ships heading to America.
Three days into the journey, the speedwell starts taking on water.
So they bring it back to port.
We can't make this.
It's like a two month journey through rough seas.
They come back to port.
They check every last nook and cranny.
The way they did that back then, you would light a candle and you would take that candle and you would go through the every seam.
Because obviously if it was leaking
the under of the water part you would know you would see the water coming in.
No water's coming in when they're in port.
They're doing so they're doing the candle test and they're waiting for the wind to come through the crack, the blow against the cam.
Nothing.
So they go, we can't find it.
So whatever it was, it was, let's go again.
So they go it again a couple days into it.
It starts taking on water again and they go, we gotta go back.
And they come back and they come to the conclusion, whatever it is, we can't take this speed well.
And there was a handful of people who goes, God's not in it.
Think about that.
Because we get the benefit of seeing God was in this great nation.
But there's a handful of people going, just God's not in it.
And it's just too hard.
Then there was 20 people because they had to downsize it who willingly said, I won't go.
Some said it's too hard.
Some goes, we understand.
cramming on the one ship.
So there's like 20 more people says, okay, we won't go.
And it was likened to be God, you know, this is too many people.
Gideon's army, that's way too many people bring less.
So bring less, bring less so that only one person can get the glory and it's gonna be the Lord.
So they cram into the Mayflower.
That's why it was the Mayflower only.
And they crammed into what's called the tween deck, the cargo hole, a middle deck, then the upper deck.
102 of our forefathers and foremothers crammed into a tween deck the size of a volleyball court.
102 people see the size of a volleyball court.
It's not even the size of a basketball court.
102 of them crammed in for 66 days.
You cram into a hatches baton down, fresh air, limited, rough seas, everything that goes with it.
No bathrooms.
You know how all this would work.
102 of them crammed into that tween deck.
And here's what God was doing.
God was forging a nation on the Mayflower.
When they got off, the words that you and I speak as this great nation was forged in that tween deck, united we stand, divided we fall.
And here is what God is doing with the sons of Israel.
If you're divided, when you enter into Egypt, you will fall.
And he's uniting them.
And what a history and a beautiful history that we have as Americans and what was willing to be sacrificed 66 days in a twin deck before to service someone to ask them, how do I pray about your trip to Nepal?
I'm telling you, it's like I need the mental conditioning to spend what's going to be a total of 24 hours on an airplane for just one day.
The Mayflower
four fathers would come and go, are you serious?
Of course, a fossil ball.
I'm not complaining because I don't want to show up in heaven and he smacks me down going, are you serious?
You complained about stuck on an airplane for 24 hours.
You know what I've been to?
Shipwrecked in the deep and all those type of things.
Well, moving on as we look at God's goodness, Jacob has to let Benjamin go.
And that's going to be hard.
Verse 11 through 14.
And their father, Israel,
said to them, if it must be so, then do this.
Take some of the best fruits of the land in your vessel and carry down a present for the man.
A little balm, a little honey, spices, mare, pistachio, nuts, and almonds.
So these are things that they've been stewarding and protecting through this famine, verse 12.
take double money in your hand and take back in your hand, the money that was returned.
Remember that, they all came back with their money.
In the mouth of your sacks, perhaps it was an oversight.
Some look at this and I've looked at it both ways.
Jacob is doing the
conniving thing like he did when he was meeting Esau.
Send the first herd over, send 400 sheep over, send this gift over, send them in waves, and maybe we'll find favor.
And he's doing this kind of conniving, but I'm gonna tell you why I don't think so.
Isn't it interesting the name that we've used three times, Israel?
Last chapter was Jacob.
Why did you do this?
This chapter is Israel, governed by God.
And I think there's something that God weaves into this Bible of ours that gives us insight.
When I use the name Israel, he's being governed by God.
And here we see that that's why I go, I don't think he's trying to buy the favor in those days, just like it would be today in many ways.
It's pain, honor to the
Dignitary I'm coming in I'm paying honor to you.
You are second in command.
I am making sure that it's being conveyed that I recognize you and who you are and I Bring these gifts as an acknowledgement of your position and these things Not a bad plan to bring double the money
You never know what the food prices are at this time, so give credit to that.
And you know what I see here though is Jacob's not trying to save a buck either.
Because you know what?
What's good is the money if you all die.
We need to be good stewards.
He's proven good stewardship here is they still have pistachios and balm and almonds and these type of things, even in the middle of a flood.
But we see his willingness to spend money on what's important.
I just want to say that for us.
I know we're Americans and we can kind of come with this place that we always need to have this bank account.
We need to be comfortable, giver when again.
I love what he said.
I remember 30 years ago, listen to him at a pastor's conference, he goes, you know what you should do, churches?
Every 10 years, you should give away all your money and bulldoze your building.
He's joking about that, of course, but he's like, give away all your money, bulldoze your building, because he goes, you know what happens?
After you build your building, you get a bank account.
I'll say you trust in your building and you trust in your bank account.
bulldoze it all, give it all away, and come back to where you started, and just saying, Lord, if you don't show up here, nothing's gonna happen here.
I just say that is, there's a place for us, especially as a church.
We should be always looking, and we do, and I just wanna convey that to you.
We're always looking for our brothers and sisters across the world, and how we can help them
build their church and start their ministry.
Much is given, much is required, and I love it that we get to be part of, hey, we can help build that building for you.
Hey, we can help build that ministry center for you.
The average income of this area is $30 a month.
We can help you.
to engraider than that.
Verse 13 and 14, take your brother also and arise.
Go back to the man.
And may God Almighty give you mercy before the man that he may release your other brother and Benjamin.
If I am bereaved, I am bereaved.
Look at this in verse 14.
And may God Almighty
give you mercy.
I love what I'm watching in Jacob at this point.
And there's a great word here for me and you.
Jacob's coming back.
There's a man down there.
We keep reading, the man, the man, the man.
And I think that's purposeful for us.
They don't know it's Joseph, but the man, the man, the man.
There's a man before us who has control of our whole destiny.
He chooses whether we live or die, the man, the man, the man.
And now He comes, and with this one word speaks a powerful sermon to each and every one of us.
But with this one, two words here, God Almighty.
He's now saying, God Almighty is between us and this man.
He may be the man, he may have all the power in the land and all these things, but there is a God Almighty between us and him.
And I just want to remind you of that.
Maybe you're in some relational difficulty.
Maybe you're in some employment difficulty.
You have a man over you and seems to have the power over you or whatever the situation is, that it seems like there's this
person that has this power.
But may we always know as believers, followers of Jesus Christ, there is a God Almighty between us and that person.
And there is a God Almighty between us and that devil.
That devil cannot touch us because there is a God Almighty between us and him.
And once we come to this place that we think the man
has the power.
And as I'm hearing myself say it, I'm sounding like one of those hippies or something from the 70s.
You know, the man!
But I'm saying it as they go, this man, this human has the power.
And Jacob comes to the place, there's a God Almighty.
No one can touch us.
Nothing can be done against us unless the God Almighty allows it through that filter gate.
And here's the hard one.
And here's a word for you, parents.
Jacob, Israel.
Jacob doesn't want last chapter Jacob, the man of the flesh, he'll catch her.
He doesn't want to let Benjamin go.
Here in this chapter, Israel is willing to let him go.
The man who's governed by God comes to the place, I have to let Benjamin go.
And parent, grandparent, it takes us for the hand of God to be upon us to let our kids go.
There's a place that we have to let them go and become their own person.
We can see Benjamin, he's willing to go.
No Benjamin going, I don't want to go.
This sounds scary.
He's only 20 and he's been, you know, probably coddled all the way.
He's willing to go.
He's ready to go and he goes.
And here it takes Israel to be governed by God to say, I'm going to let you go.
Proverbs three, five and six for us.
Trust in the Lord with all your heart, lean not on your own understandings and all your ways, acknowledge him and he'll direct your path.
Parents,
We can't suffocate our kids.
There's a place that parents will over-protect their children and suffocate them out of fear that's going to happen to them.
And I'm telling you, I'm speaking, I'm with you.
It's a scary place.
I wish I could protect my kids until the day they went home to be with the Lord.
But I know that I have to train them up in the way that they should go.
and then let them go, and let them be their own man, their own woman in the Lord, and let them have the same experience with the God Almighty as I do, as you do, and let them grow in their relationship with Him as I do, and you do.
They have to be fully free to be able to become the man, woman of God, that God wants them to be.
And if we don't, we stunt them.
Jacob
could have suffocated, see I'm using the word Jacob, could have suffocated Benjamin and stifled his growth in trusting the Lord himself.
As soon as Benjamin leaves, he has to now become a man who trusts in the Lord himself.
At the age of 20, 22 he's probably at, he's got to go and become his own person.
So I encourage you in that and you and I in that that we
have to let them go, and I know this is hard for him."
Well, verse 15 through 25, the brothers brought to Joseph's house, but the guilt will follow them.
Verse 15 and 16, so the men took the present in Benjamin, and they took double money in their hand and arose and went down to Egypt, and they stood before Joseph.
When Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the steward of the house, take these men to my home and slaughter an animal and make ready for these men will dine
with me at noon.
If the interpreter would have interpreted to them, we know there's an interpreter, or if he came and says, hey, you 10 boys, you 11, one's in prison.
Here's what Joseph said.
We read the whole sentence, but put yourself in their place.
Here's what the second in command says, take these men and slaughter.
They'd be like, an animal and they'd be like, oh, whew.
Verse 17 and 18 though, they catch their breath, their hearts back in their chest.
Then the men did as Joseph ordered and the men brought the men into Joseph's house.
Now the men were afraid because they were brought into Joseph's house and they said, it is because of the money which was returned in our sacks the first time that we brought in so that he may make us make a case against us and seize us and take us as slaves with our donkeys.
You know what I find interesting here?
We know from the last chapter they go, this is happening to us, this accusation of being spies because what we did to Joseph.
And now here they are, they're being brought into this palace because Joseph got money.
He's second in command.
They know he will always have servants and they know Simians here.
He's probably, they're probably saying Simians mopping the floor now and, you know, cooking the vittles and these type of things, but
Do you notice something here?
We know Joseph has this good heart to bring him into dying, but they're what?
They're suspicious.
Shakespeare said in one of his plays, it's kind of the paraphrase, suspicion haunts the guilty mind.
You know when you're guilty, you have a guilty conscience last week study.
It's available to be heard again.
When you have a guilty conscience, you become suspicious of everyone else because you think everyone else is like you.
So here they think Joseph has to be like us.
because what we did were evil men, were rough men.
And so he must be just like us because perception becomes reality, whether it's right or wrong.
The things we perceive becomes what we think is the reality.
And here these men are living in this guilt and therefore they're suspicious every
turn of the corner that someone is gonna be just like them and do what?
Sell them into slavery.
As we sold our brother in the slavery, that's what all these other people were gonna be.
Because we did it, that's probably what all of men in the world are like.
And yet here we see this amazing grace.
God's grace chasing them down.
And look at these words, if it was written in Hebrew,
what this word would sound like to them, 19 through 23.
When they drew near to the steward of Joseph's house, they talked with him at the door of the house and said, oh, sir, we indeed came down the first time to buy food.
But it happened when we came to the encampment that we opened our sacks.
And there each man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money in full weight so that we have brought it back with our hand.
And we have brought down other money in our hand to buy food.
We do not know who
Our money in our sacks, but he said the steward in Hebrew their language Peace Shalom Be with you do not be afraid your God and the God of your father has given you treasure in your sack I had your money then he brought simian out to them.
Oh this word
Shalom peace.
It's okay.
The God of your fathers He sees you and so they can have this and they bring Simeon out and here they all are together in verse 24 and 25 So the men brought them so the man brought the men into Joseph's house and gave them water and they washed their feet He gave their donkeys feed and
Then they made the present ready for Joseph coming at noon, for they heard that they would eat bread there.
Isn't this amazing?
Do you care that they fed the donkeys?
Anybody?
Like, this is the book of Genesis.
Why do we have details about donkeys getting fed?
Because that's who our God is.
And there's a great application here for me and you.
God gives us these details to show us He's a God of details.
I fed your donkeys because the money you would buy with the food will feed you and your family.
It's a free provision for your donkeys.
Because if your donkeys don't eat, they die.
If they die, you don't get the grain back home.
Here we see this amazing detail that God's looking, I'm gonna even gonna take care of your donkeys, because your donkeys are needed to take care of the rest of your family.
God's just amazing in the details, every detail of our life to which I say, whatever detail you need today, He's in it.
Every last detail.
And you may not even know your donkeys need fed.
But here your Lord is taking care of the details of such things.
And we close with the brothers dying together and Joseph weeps.
Verse 26 and 27, when Joseph came home, they brought him the present which was in their hand into the house and bowed down before him, hear the dream again, coming the past.
bowed down before him to the earth, then he asked them about their well-being and said, is your father well, the old man of whom you spoke?
Is he still alive?
He knows Jacob's getting up in age.
He has this heart for his dad.
And now verse 28 through 30, and they answered, your servant, our father is in good health.
He is still alive and they bowed their heads down and prostrated themselves.
And then he lifted his eyes and saw his brother Benjamin, his mother's son, and said, is this your younger brother of whom you spoke to me?
And he said, God be gracious to you, my son.
Now the heart yearned for his brother.
So Joseph made haste and sought somewhere to weep.
And he went into his chamber and went there.
You ever weep like this?
Think about this.
Benjamin might have been two years old when Joseph goes and sold in the slavery.
Joseph's been in Egypt now 20 plus years.
Let's just call it 22.
Famine severe, gotta come get 24 years.
Old maybe is Benjamin, but I want you to consider this.
Rachel died giving birth to Benjamin.
Four wives to Jacob, each would be living in their own tent.
Benjamin would been in the tent with Joseph and Rachel.
But Rachel died.
So who is Benjamin's caretaker?
It's Joseph.
And any of you are living in that place where you're the older sibling, just that beauty and that power where you're like a second mother or father to this child.
Benjamin's just a baby.
Joseph, he's 17 years old.
He's probably got 15 years on Benjamin.
When the storm comes, the wolf howls, this little two-year-old crawls into bed with Joseph finds his comfort and security in Joseph.
You know the big brother
with the little brother holding hands looking up like you are bigger than life to me.
And here Benjamin would for these 20 some years be raised with no mother and no big brother and a very distracted dad because he's got these other three wives with these other 10 children and the grandchildren and the likes of all these things and I just think
What would it have been like, and I think of Joseph, what would it have been like in that prison, in that slavery and Potiphar's house, the agonizing thought that you're not there for Benjamin?
The separation in his life of no physical touch,
a flesh that loves him and adored him all those years that he's in that prison or in Potiphar's house and how many nights he must have sat there just simply weeping for Benjamin.
How many nights did Benjamin sit there weeping?
When is he coming home?
And again, it's still fresh in my heart and my pain as I think of, you know,
Erica Kirk and these two babies, as the three-year-old said, where's Daddy?
And she had to say, Daddy's on a special business trip with Jesus.
Three years old, you start relating to what this feels like for this three-year-old.
Where is Daddy?
And here's Benjamin, where is my big brother?
He didn't even know a mother.
They all got mothers.
I don't have a mother, but I got a brother.
Have you ever cried like that?
Whatever your loss may be, whatever your prison may be.
Psalm 56, verse 8, you number my wanderings.
Put my tears into your bottle.
Are they not in your book?
Verse 31, 33.
Then he washed his face.
would have had to be put on his mascara.
You know that you'll bring her look.
And came out and he restrained himself and said, serve the bread.
So they served him a piece by himself and them by themselves and Egyptians who ate with him by themselves because the Egyptians could not eat food with the Hebrews.
For that it is an abomination to the Egyptians.
And they sat down before the first,
They sat before him, the first born according to his birthright and the youngest according to his youth, and the men looked in astonishment at one another.
And what they're saying is Joseph sat them at this table that was dedicated for the Hebrews in perfect age order, starting with Benjamin all the way through to the oldest.
And they start to look and go, because here's the 11 empty seats.
And they go, Ben, you sit here.
Then they would take the next one.
You sit here.
And they would sit there.
And they would come to this realization.
This is in perfect chronological birth order.
This would start to develop our next chapter.
Man, there is something, some spiritual divine upon this man.
He can see and understand these type of things.
But to put them in this perfect order, 11 is the numbering
order and so you have to take everyone and move.
You know what the probability of putting them in that order is mathematically 1 in 39,941,000.
We'll just round it off to 40 million.
This is amazing what we see here in verse 34.
Then they took
Servings to them from before him, but Benjamin serving was five times as much as any of theirs.
So they drank and were married with him.
Benjamin gets five times and no one blanks.
Joseph's looking at their heart.
Do they have resentment towards Benjamin like they did?
And there's no nothing there.
And so he's seeing that they're changing and
the heart that's being changed here and I just close with this and God bless you guys for coming on a Sunday morning.
What a mess.
What a mess of a family all the way back to
selling them in the slavery and all these type of things that we read and we are reading and the guilt that they have and the suspicious mind that they have and all these type of things that are going on here and I just go, what a mess.
People today want to go, I grew up in a dysfunctional home.
That's why I'm messed up.
Hey, stop.
This family was messed up and the point I want to make about this
for all of you and for all of us, myself included, is they could have sat there and used that and called upon that for all their life to justify for being a mess and doing messy things.
But God reaches in and God can take this mess of all this dysfunctional and turn them as the title of the message, forge them into a nation.
And they will last for 4,000 years as a nation.
So that God can hold up and go, this is what I can change from a mess into the divine picture that when I put my hand upon a family, there is nothing that can destroy that.
And when I put my hand upon a man or a woman, there is nothing that can destroy it.
Everyone had to make their decision
turn and be part of the nation or go their own way and here we're reading them be forged as a nation and coming together and God did what he said he would do as he promised to be to turn them into a great nation and do a great work and so too he will do for you and I if only we say here I am Lord.
and me.
Father, we bless you.
I thank you for this word as we look at this family, what a mess of a family, but what an amazing God who can take all the greatest messes of a family, of a life, and turn it into the greatest one of the
Testimonies, a trophy lifted up high of what you can do when a man or woman will yield themselves and what a family can be when they will all yield themselves to the great I am who will become to them all that they need and the great testimony and demonstration that God can do through a family.
And so Lord, nations are made up of individuals and a culmination cumulative and families are made up of individuals.
And the individuals make the family, and it only takes one to break it.
But when all of them come and just yield themselves, what a testimony of that you can hold up and say, look what I can do, and all will yield to me.
So Lord, what a testimony of a passage that you put before us.
And great grace we see all along the way as we see this reunion and we see your heart seize every pain and every drop in the heartbreak of Joseph.
And I pray for anyone here today, but your heart sees everything that needs to be broken in a man or woman so you can forge this great nation and family.
And so Lord, may we yield to that.
And I pray these things in your name.
Amen.
God bless you.
Chapter 44 next week.